Workflow Cancellations (#5)
temporalio/edu-interacting-with-workflows-typescript: workflow-cancellations/cancel-vs-terminate-workflows.md

# Canceling vs. Terminating Workflows

In Temporal, there are two primary ways to interrupt a Workflow Execution: Canceling and Terminating. Each method serves a different purpose and has distinct implications.

## Canceling Workflows

Canceling a Workflow provides a graceful way to stop Workflow Execution. This action resembles sending a SIGTERM to a process in operating systems. It's a gentle request for the Workflow to stop.

> 

Author: addded

- The system records a `WorkflowExecutionCancelRequested` Event in the Workflow History.
- A Workflow Task gets scheduled to process the cancellation.
- The Workflow has the opportunity to execute cleanup logic or other necessary final steps. This might involve releasing resources, notifying other services, or saving the current state.
- The system does not forcibly stop the Workflow. Instead, it allows the Workflow to respond to the cancellation request at its own pace.

An example of when one would cancel a Workflow is a financial application where a Workflow handles transaction processing. If certain transactions need to be halted (due to fraud detection or user request), cancellation requests can be issued to stop these Workflows. The Workflows can then execute any final steps, like reverting partial transactions or updating logs, before gracefully shutting down.

## Terminating Workflows

Terminating a Workflow is more abrupt and is similar to killing a process. It forcefully stops the Workflow Execution without any cleanup or grace period.

> 

Author: added

# Canceling vs. Terminating Workflow Executions

In Temporal, there are two primary ways to interrupt a Workflow Execution: Canceling and Terminating. Each method serves a different purpose and has distinct implications.

## Canceling Workflow Executions

> Canceling a Workflow Execution provides a graceful way to stop the Workflow Execution. This action resembles sending a SIGTERM to a process in operating systems. It's a gentle request for the Workflow Execution to stop.

Author: Thanks for explaining this so well! Used your example

> Canceling a Workflow Execution provides a graceful way to stop the Workflow Execution. This action resembles sending a `kill` command in UNIX. Canceling a Workflow is a gentle request for the Workflow Execution to stop, but allows the process to perform cleanup before exiting.

Reviewer: > This action resembles sending a `kill` command in UNIX.

True, but the comparison may be confusing to some students, especially that you later say that Terminate "is similar to killing a process". If you want to retain the comparison to using the `kill` command, you should specify the appropriate kill signal (e.g. `kill -9` or `kill -15`).

> Here are some attributes about Workflow Cancellations: 

Author: Fixed

- The system records a `WorkflowExecutionCancelRequested` Event in the Workflow History.
- A Workflow Task gets scheduled to process the cancellation.
- The Workflow has the opportunity to execute cleanup logic or other necessary final steps. This might involve releasing resources, notifying other services, or saving the current state.
- The system does not forcibly stop the Workflow. Instead, it allows the Workflow to respond to the cancellation request at its own pace.

An example of when one would cancel a Workflow Execution is a financial application where a Workflow handles transaction processing. If certain transactions need to be stopped (due to fraud detection or user request), cancellation requests can be issued to stop these Workflows. The Workflows can then execute any final steps, like reverting partial transactions or updating logs, before gracefully shutting down.

## Terminating Workflow Executions

Terminating a Workflow Execution is more abrupt and is similar to killing a process. It forcefully stops the Workflow Execution without any cleanup or grace period.

> Here are some attributes about Workflow Terminations: 

Author: Fixed

- The system records a `WorkflowExecutionTerminated` Event in the Workflow History.
- Termination is immediate and unconditional. The Workflow Execution stops right away, without any opportunity for handling or cleanup in the Workflow code.

> - When you terminate a Workflow Execution, any of its Activities that are currently running _may_ continue running until they complete, although any results they return are ignored.

Reviewer: To be exact, running Activities from a terminated workflow implicitly and immediately get cancelled, though it is true that the activity worker will only know about that once the activity completes or send a heartbeat.

- Unlike cancellation, no additional Workflow Task is scheduled following termination.

An example of when one would terminate a Workflow Execution is if a Workflow is stuck in an infinite loop or unresponsive state, termination is used to forcefully stop it. This might be necessary if the Workflow is consuming excessive resources or if it's in an irrecoverable state. In a production environment, terminating a Workflow Execution should be the last resort.

> A Workflow Execution may be terminated if the size of any payload (i.e., the input passed into, or the result returned by, an Activity or Workflow) exceeds 2 MB or if the entire Event History exceeds 50 MB.

Author: Good call, I added this

> A Workflow Execution may be terminated if the size of any payload (i.e., the input passed into, or the result returned by, an Activity or Workflow) exceeds 2 MB or if the entire Event History exceeds 50 MB. Workflow Execution will also be terminated if the Event History surpasses 50K Events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Termination of a Workflow by the Temporal Cluster

In rare occasions, the Temporal Cluster itslef may initiate termination a Workflow Execution. This happens when the Workflow Execution exceeds some operational limits that makes it impossible to make any further progression. For example, a Workflow Execution will automatically get terminated in the following situations:

- The size of the entire Event History exceeds 50 MB;
- The length of the Event History surpasses 50K Events;
- The size of the Workflow Execution's mutable state exceeds 8 MB.
```
